[red-knot] Method calls and the descriptor protocol (#16121)
astral-sh/ruff: crates/red_knot_python_semantic/resources/mdtest/descriptor_protocol.md

Reviewer: Another idea for a test: a non-callable `__set__` method:

```pycon
>>> class Foo:
...     def __get__(self, instance, owner):
...         return 42
...     __set__ = None
...     
>>> class Bar:
...     foo = Foo()
...     
>>> b = Bar()
>>> b.foo
42
>>> b.foo = 56
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<python-input-60>", line 1, in <module>
    b.foo = 56
    ^^^^^
TypeError: 'NoneType' object is not callable
```

Author: > the traceback range from CPython looks kind-of off there -- it should probably highlight the whole attribute assignment rather than just the left-hand side

I guess you could argue that a mere access of that descriptor object *in store-context* is an error, as it would necessarily invoke a call to `__set__`? For example, if you had `for b.foo in iterable: ...`, it's reasonable to only highlight the `b.foo` as the loop variable.

Reviewer: Yeah, fair point -- and I think you're right that that's probably why we end up with that range. It still looks odd to a user in this specific case IMO, though!

Author: > If you want a descriptor to be overridable, you should really give it an explicit `__set__` method IMO.

But a descriptor can not really replace itself using `__set__`, can it? So it's probably a valid thing to do. I'd like to revisit this when I work on assignments to descriptors, which is not included in this PR.

Reviewer: > But a descriptor can not really replace itself using `__set__`, can it?

no, but if `__set__` is defined it means that the attribute can be set on _instances_ without the descriptor object itself being entirely shadowed by an attribute in an instance dictionary

> I'd like to revisit this when I work on assignments to descriptors, which is not included in this PR.

SGTM 👍

Reviewer 2: Shadowing non-data descriptors with instance-dict attributes is a quite common and useful thing to do; it's the core of a widely-used technique for creating very efficient "cached properties", which now also exists in the stdlib as `functools.cached_property`. I think enabling this use case is basically the reason why non-data descriptors work the way they do. So I do not think we should forbid this or emit a diagnostic on it.

Reviewer: > I would flip it around and say, if you don't want your descriptor to be shadowable, you should define a `__set__` method on it (even if it just raises an exception, like a `@property` without a setter does), and then it will be a data descriptor and not shadowable.

Yes, fair enough -- that's probably the better way to think about it. We can leave this for now, then. Thanks!

I guess the way to signal to a type checker that a descriptor should be read-only might be to set `__set__` to `None? Since annotating a `__set__` method as returning `Never` just leads to confusing diagnostics about dead code later on in the program, rather than an error when the descriptor attribute is actually assigned to.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that could work. Though we can probably also special-case a return type of `Never` with a better diagnostic in some cases?

        pass

class C:

>     ten: Ten = Ten()

Author: This change (and similar ones below) isn't needed, but I didn't want to see `Unknown` everywhere. We have an extra test for the undeclared case further down below.

        self._value = int(value)

class C:
    flexible_int: FlexibleInt = FlexibleInt()

c = C()

reveal_type(c.flexible_int)  # revealed: int | None

# TODO: These should not be errors
# error: [invalid-assignment]
c.flexible_int = 42  # okay
# error: [invalid-assignment]
c.flexible_int = "42"  # also okay!

reveal_type(c.flexible_int)  # revealed: int | None

# TODO: This should be an error, but the message needs to be improved.
# error: [invalid-assignment] "Object of type `None` is not assignable to attribute `flexible_int` of type `FlexibleInt`"
c.flexible_int = None  # not okay

reveal_type(c.flexible_int)  # revealed: int | None
```

## Data and non-data descriptors

> Descriptors that define `__set__` or `__delete__` are called *data descriptors* (e.g. properties),
> while those that only define `__get__` are called non-data descriptors (e.g. functions,
> `classmethod` or `staticmethod`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Descriptors that define `__set__` or `__delete__` are called *data descriptors*. An example
of a data descriptor is a `property` with a setter and/or a deleter.
Descriptors that only define `__get__`, meanwhile, are called *non-data descriptors*. Examples include
functions, `classmethod` or `staticmethod`).
```

    def __set__(self, instance: int, value) -> None:
        pass

class NonDataDescriptor:
    def __get__(self, instance: object, owner: type | None = None) -> Literal["non-data"]:
        return "non-data"

class C:
    data_descriptor = DataDescriptor()
    non_data_descriptor = NonDataDescriptor()

    def f(self):
        # This explains why data descriptors come first in the precendence chain. If
        # instance attributes would take priority, we would override the descriptor
        # here. Instead, this calls `DataDescriptor.__set__`, i.e. it does not affect
        # the type of the `data_descriptor` attribute.
        self.data_descriptor = 1

        # However, for non-data descriptors, instance attributes do take precedence.
        # So it is possible to override them.
        self.non_data_descriptor = 1

c = C()

reveal_type(c.data_descriptor)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal["data"]

# TODO: This should ideally be `Unknown | Literal["non-data", 1]`.
#
#     - Mypy does not support this either and only shows `Literal['non-data']`
#     - Pyright shows `int | Literal['non-data']` here, but also wrongly shows the
#       same for all other three cases.
#

> reveal_type(c.non_data_descriptor)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal["non-data"]

Author: I didn't consider this high priority, so it's left as a TODO for now.

        # instance attributes would take priority, we would override the descriptor
        # here. Instead, this calls `DataDescriptor.__set__`, i.e. it does not affect
        # the type of the `data_descriptor` attribute.
        self.data_descriptor = 1

        # However, for non-data descriptors, instance attributes do take precedence.
        # So it is possible to override them.
        self.non_data_descriptor = 1

c = C()

# TODO: This should ideally be `Unknown | Literal["data"]`.
#
#     - Pyright also wrongly shows `int | Literal['data']` here
#     - Mypy shows Literal["data"] here, but also shows Literal["non-data"] below.
#
reveal_type(c.data_descriptor)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal["data", 1]

reveal_type(c.non_data_descriptor)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal["non-data", 1]

reveal_type(C.data_descriptor)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal["data"]

reveal_type(C.non_data_descriptor)  # revealed: Unknown | Literal["non-data"]

# It is possible to override data descriptors via class objects. The following
# assignment does not call `DataDescriptor.__set__`. For this reason, we infer
# `Unknown | …` for all (descriptor) attributes.

> C.data_descriptor = "something else"  # This is okay

Author: > we could just use the return type of __get__ without the Unknown | union for the type of the attribute when accessed on instances or classes.

Yes. This is how I initially modeled it, but then Carl rightly pointed out that they can be overwritten on the class.

> consider having an option

I can't really tell how much demand there would be for an option like this. I'm going to assume it's fine to defer this for now.

> C.data_descriptor = "something else"  # This is okay

Reviewer: > I'm going to assume it's fine to defer this for now.

of course

class C:
    def __init__(self):
        self.ten: Ten = Ten()

# TODO: Should be Ten

> reveal_type(C().ten)  # revealed: Literal[10]

Author: This TODO refers to the second "limitation" in the PR description:

> We currently distinguish between `Type::member` (with descriptor protocol) and `Type::static_member` (without descriptor protocol). The former corresponds to `obj.attr`, the latter corresponds to `getattr_static(obj, "attr")`. However, to model some details correctly, we would also need to distinguish between a static member lookup *with* and *without* instance variables. The lookup without instance variables corresponds to `find_name_in_mro` [here](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/descriptor.html#invocation-from-an-instance). We currently approximate both using `member_static`, which leads to two open TODOs. Changing this would be a larger refactoring of `Type::own_instance_member`, so I chose to leave it out of this PR.

> might result in significant architecture changes if deferred

Yes. I think it will require us to split `static_member` into two methods, a parametrized method, or something similar. I do not think that it requires any significant changes to the logic being added in this PR. Ideally, we would just replace one `.static_member(…)` lookup with a `.find_in_mro(…)` lookup, but I could be wrong.

I can try to look into this today and potentially add it to this PR.

> reveal_type(C().ten)  # revealed: Literal[10]

Author: I did look into this and got quite far, but I'd prefer to postpone this, and focus on what's in this PR first.

            return "called on class object"

class C:
    d: Descriptor = Descriptor()

# TODO: should be `Literal["called on class object"]
reveal_type(C.d)  # revealed: LiteralString

# TODO: should be `Literal["called on instance"]
reveal_type(C().d)  # revealed: LiteralString
```

## Undeclared descriptor arguments

If a descriptor attribute is not declared, we union with `Unknown`, just like for regular
attributes, since that attribute could be overwritten externally. Even data-descriptors with a
`__set__` method can be overwritten when accessed through a class object.

```py
class Descriptor:
    def __get__(self, instance: object, owner: type | None = None) -> int:

>         return 1

Reviewer: I know this specific example is showing what happens if a descriptor is _set_ on the class object. But the `__get__` signature here implies that if the attribute is _read_ (rather than _set_) on the class, we should emit an error, since `None` would be passed as the first argument to `__get__` in that case. Is that correct?

Author: > But the `__get__` signature here implies that if the attribute is _read_ (rather than _set_) on the class, we should emit an error, since `None` would be passed as the first argument to `__get__` in that case. Is that correct?

I you access `C.descriptor` on the class itself, `None` would be passed as the `instance` argument, yes. But that should not produce an error. `None` is compatible with `object`. This `__get__` method here was not supposed to distinguish between class-based or instance-based access.

Reviewer: > `None` is compatible with `object`

duh, of course. Sorry, I guess I forgot this was the case :-)

    def __set__(self, instance: object, value: int) -> None:
        pass

class C:
    descriptor = Descriptor()

C.descriptor = "something else"

> reveal_type(C.descriptor)  # revealed: Unknown | int

Reviewer: should this have a TODO next to it about how this would change to `Literal["something else"]` if we did local-scope narrowing of attributes based on assignments?

Author: I added a comment without a TODO.

reveal_type(f.__get__(None, type(f))(1))  # revealed: str

wrapper_descriptor = getattr_static(f, "__get__")

reveal_type(wrapper_descriptor)  # revealed: <wrapper-descriptor `__get__` of `function` objects>
reveal_type(wrapper_descriptor(f, None, type(f)))  # revealed: Literal[f]

# Attribute access on the method-wrapper `f.__get__` falls back to `MethodWrapperType`:
reveal_type(f.__get__.__hash__)  # revealed: <bound method `__hash__` of `MethodWrapperType`>

# Attribute access on the wrapper-descriptor falls back to `WrapperDescriptorType`:
reveal_type(wrapper_descriptor.__qualname__)  # revealed: @Todo(@property)
```

We can also bind the free function `f` to an instance of a class `C`:

```py
class C: ...

bound_method = wrapper_descriptor(f, C(), C)

reveal_type(bound_method)  # revealed: <bound method `f` of `C`>
```

We can then call it, and the instance of `C` is implicitly passed to the first parameter of `f`
(`x`):

```py
reveal_type(bound_method())  # revealed: str
```

Finally, we test some error cases for the call to the wrapper descriptor:

```py
# Calling the wrapper descriptor without any arguments is an

> # error: [missing-argument] "No arguments provided for required parameters `self`, `instance`"

Reviewer: haha! Taking literate testing to the next level by integrating the assertion as part of a sentence 🤣

Reviewer 2: Yes, I first noticed @sharkdp using this trick in the documentation/tests around our "union with Unknown" behavior.
